---
title: Academic Programs
layout: cloud
permalink: /acpro.html
about-featured-image: burgundy.gif
---

The *New* ASU Story: Academic Programs
======================================

 From its roots as a Territorial Normal School established to train teachers for 
 work in the public schools of the Arizona Territory, Arizona State 
 University developed into a multi-purpose institution that provides educational 
 opportunities to a diverse student population. A century of academic growth 
 ushered in a university that offers a variety of subject areas and 
 disciplines with enrollment of 50,365 on the university's three campuses for 
 the fall semester of 2000.
 
By an Act of the Legislative Assembly of Arizona, approved March 10, 1885, provision was made for the establishment of a Normal School at Tempe, Arizona. 

The institution was charged to provide "instruction of persons, both male and female, in the arts of teaching and in all various branches that pertain to good common chool education: also, to give instruction in the mechanical arts and in husbandry and agricultural chemistry, the fundamental law of the United States, and in what egards the rights and duties of citizens.

 Three aspects of the Act affected the development of the school: it had no official name; although a normal school is designed to train teachers, instruction n mechanical arts and animal husbandry and agricultural chemistry were included; and the 3-year curriculum was dedicated to training for teachers to serve in the public schools of Arizona. 

 The school's name changed three times in its first fifteen years. In 1901 it was officially named Normal School of Arizona to distinguish it from the Flagstaff Normal School. The last four name changes are associated with expansions of the curriculum and the degrees offered.

## Territorial Normal School at Tempe 1885-1889 
 
 Admission requirements were a minimum age of 16 years old and successful completion of an entrance examination. Advanced placement by examination as accepted with 22 weeks of attendance. The principal taught all subjects. Until 1923 sub-normal classes were offered to students lacking in a high school diploma. Upon completion of requirements a diploma and teaching certificate were awarded. On the first day of school there was one teacher and 33 students. 

{% include feature/image.html objectid="05acpro;02acpro" %}

## Arizona Territorial Normal School 1889-1896

In 1889 the curriculum continued to reflect teacher training. A teaching
certificate for grammar school education required two years of course
work, extensive testing and at least 18 years of age. In 1891 the
faculty increased to two instructors, the Principal and Assistant
Principal for 30 students.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="03acpro;04acpro" %}

## Normal School of Arizona, 1896-1903

In 1899, the requirement for a diploma increased to a three year course
with a show of proficiency in academic and professional (teacher
instruction) studies. In 1900 there were six faculty members and 131
students. The old Normal Building now housed the new Training School
where the student teachers gained practical skills.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="08acpro;09acpro;10acpro" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="11acpro;12acpro" %}

## Tempe Normal School 1903-1925

Due to a Normal School opening in Flagstaff, the legislature instituted
an official and legal name in 1901, Tempe Normal School, that was
established in all publications in 1903. The Department of Manual Arts
(1906) and classes in Agriculture (1912) were introduced into the
curriculum as was legislated in the original act in 1885. In President
Teddy Roosevelt\'s speech at the school, agriculture courses were
encouraged. The curriculum finally resembled the 1885 legislation and
met the needs of the local people. In 1919, there were 38 faculty
members and 320 students. Both the Manual Arts and Agriculture programs
evolved into departments in the college, then the university.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="15acpro;16acpro;17aacpro;18acpro;19acpro" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="22acpro;23acpro;24acpro;25acpro" %}

## Tempe State Teachers College 1925-1928

The Alumni Association sponsored a move to raise the level of the Normal
School to a teachers\' college. In 1923, the college admission
requirements were raised to a high school diploma. The Normal School,
with 41 faculty members and 672 students, became a teachers\' college in
1925 with the power to establish a four year-college curriculum offering
a Bachelor of Education. A two year curriculum was also offered, leading
to a diploma to teach in Arizona elementary schools. An additional two
years earned a Bachelor of Education degree. The Bachelor of Arts in
Education, usually conferred by a University, was not authorized until
1929. (LD179.15 1940 T46)

{% include feature/image.html objectid="28acpro;29acpro" %}

## Arizona State Teachers College 1928-1945

The Bachelor of Arts in Education degree was authorized by an act of the
Ninth Legislature in 1929. Students completing a four year course were
eligible for graduate work in education at a university, and would
receive secondary certificates permitting them to teach in Arizona high
schools. The requirement for diploma and grade school teaching
certificates increased to a three year curriculum.

In the early 1930's, Arizona State needed permanent national
accreditation to be recognized as an educational institution of quality,
but eligibility requirements of accrediting organizations specified that
a large percentage of faculty must hold advanced degrees, particularly
doctorates. As a result, many faculty contracts were terminated and new
faculty hired at the height of the Depression.

In 1933, North Central Association (NCA) Accreditation recognized the
college as a liberal arts and science college that granted the students
a degree to teach in high schools and to earn advanced degrees at other
institutions throughout the country.

In 1937 Arizona State offered its first graduate degree, the Masters in
Education. Although courses were offered in other academic and
professional disciplines, the school remained a teachers college until
1945.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="33acpro;35acpro;37acpro"%}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="38acpro;39acpro" %}

### Arizona State College 1945-1958

With the end of World War II, as the soldiers returned and demand for
additional degree programs increased, the legislature granted Arizona
State, with 68 faculty members and 1446 students, the authority to
confer non-education degrees. The Board of Regents, formed in 1945,
authorized Arizona State College the authority to grant Bachelor of Art
(BA) and Bachelor of Science (BS) degrees, and in 1946 approved the
Liberal Arts and Sciences program. In the early 1950s, the Board of
Regents asked the U.S. Department of Education to assess the state of
higher education in Arizona and in 1934 the resulting Hollis Commission
recommended university status for Arizona State, suggesting all programs
be incorporated into a four college system: College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences; The College of Education; The College of Applied Arts and
Sciences; and The College of Business Administration. These charges were
instituted in the 1955-56 school year. The 1960s saw rapid academic
growth with the addition of seven colleges and numerous research
centers. The 1970s and \'80s were fertile ground for research,
culminating in the achievement of Research I status in 1993.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="42acpro;41acpro" %}
{% include feature/image.html objectid="43acpro;44acpro;45acpro" %}
 
### Arizona State University 1958-present

By 1958 Arizona State College performed all the functions of a
university, gaining approval for Masters of Arts and Masters of Science
degrees in the new disciplines. Expansion of the programs sparked new
interest from the community, but supporters of the University of Arizona
at Tucson stonewalled several legislative proposals for renaming the
institution. After a lengthy and emotional \"name change\" drive Arizona
State University was finally authorized by a direct vote of Arizona
citizens for Proposition 200 in the November elections. The name change
was signed by Governor Ernest McFarland on December 5, 1958.

{% include feature/image.html objectid="48acpro;49acpro;50acpro;51acpro" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="52acpro;53acpro;54acpro;55acpro" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="56acpro;46acpro;57acpro" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="58acpro;59acpro;60acpro" %}

{% include feature/image.html objectid="61acpro;62acpro;50acpro" %}

ASU sites to visit for more information on this topic:

- About the University, 2000 [http://www.asu.edu/about/](http://www.asu.edu/about/)
- Academic Programs [http://www.asu.edu/programs/](http://www.asu.edu/programs/)
